---
layout: post
title: Paper Review&#58; Using Directional Antennas for Medium Access Control in Ad Hoc Networks
tags: [paper-review]
---

Some background: this is an older paper review where instead of trying to explain the paper in detail, I would summarize it, list some assumptions, and then list the pros and cons. The original paper can be found [here](https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/5211/697dcea985a8b795aa24a1f11795eab96e93.pdf).

In this paper, Choudhury et al. develop a new method for medium access control which uses the properties of directional antennas in order to create a new protocol that allows two pairs of devices to communicate at the same time, instead of waiting for one to finish. Since directional antennas point in only one direction, the authors realized that with a similar protocol to 802.11, one could aim the antennas in different directions without any interference from the other pair. The MMAC protocol, which is the main subject of this paper, is an improvement of basic DMAC (Directional Media Access Control), which has many problems including an inability to handle deafness to certain devices as well as hidden terminals due to directivity. This MMAC protocol is able to lessen the impact that deafness and hidden terminals have on signal reception, and allow for an improvement in bandwidth use and reduction in waste. Compared to basic 802.11, MMAC and DMAC have a significantly increased bandwidth, as well as a reduced impact of deafness.

Assumptions that this paper makes is that while in omnidirectional mode, there is no interference, and we can lock onto a signal and switch to directional mode. This is somewhat unlikely, as there is always interference from multiple antennas around. Second, the paper assumes that if we have a lock onto one device, we can transmit in another direction without interference from the first device. The paper assumes that you can do that until the angle between the two antennas is just 2*beta, which is not true - they will start to interfere long before that, and should actually be a bit farther apart. A third assumption is that the omni and directional antennas are operated at the same power level - while in reality most directional antennas go a lot farther. This assumption is made for the robustness of the paper, as a longer directional antenna is good for connectivity.

Three pros of this technology is an improved bandwidth for wireless devices with both a directional and omni antenna. These kinds of devices are becoming more useful, especially with the advent of near-field communications. Next, the Multi-hop network is an efficient way to get around an obstacle should you want to transmit to a device which is blocked by another device. Also, using directional antennas also tends to expand your range to what you connect with, allowing for a farther range for data transmission.
	Three weaknesses of the paper is that including both an omni and a directional antenna is still very very power hungry, especially if they’re being run at the same power. That will drain a ton of energy especially on a mobile device. Second, the multi-hop network takes longer to send data through to your destination, since often you have to go around the obstacle instead of through it, as seen in Figure 3. Instead of communicating with D to F, it went through A-B-C-F instead, which took longer and is slightly redundant. Finally, the weaknesses of deafness and the hidden terminals still persist in DMAC and MMAC, even though they are reduced.
