---
layout: post
title: Paper Review&#58; Ripple&#58; Communicating through Physical Vibration
tags: [paper-review]
---

Some background: this is an older paper review where instead of trying to explain the paper in detail, I would summarize it, list some assumptions, and then list the pros and cons. The original paper can be found [here](http://synrg.csl.illinois.edu/papers/ripple_nsdi15_nirupam.pdf).

In this paper, Roy et al. attempt to communicate by simply using the vibrations of a phone in order to send signals. These vibrations would be picked up by an accelerometer, which could then decode the signals and turn them into information. Using this method, the authors were able to obtain communication rates of 80 bits/second with an Android phone and 200 bits/second with an actual vibration motor. However, the paper noticed that the acoustic signals were available to all who could hear, and also designed countermeasures in order to stop people from eavesdropping in. The authors tested the algorithm on many different surfaces and found decent results for each surface, although nothing that would revolutionize the area of communications.

Several assumptions were made when evaluating this system. One was that the smartphone can vibrate at different frequencies, and that the frequencies could be changed to prevent surveillance or eavesdropping. However, on several phones the vibration frequency is set in stone and cannot be changed. The paper also limits itself to using accelerometers found in smartphones that are limited by software, as they are the most accessible. However, unlocked accelerometers may work better and have better results. Finally, the authors assumed that the reception of the accelerometer in the X-direction was minimal due to their set up, and as a result ignored any results from it.

There are a few pros of this technology being used for communications. One is that the technology is already built into your phone, so there is little to no cost in buying different sensors or antennas that need to be used concurrently with the technology. Another pro is the ability to use the vibration sensor with many different orientations, such as on a table or in your hand, allowing for many different types of communication. A final advantage to this type of communication is the countermeasures the algorithm can take against someone trying to intercept the signal, which has the advantage of being secure.

However, this paper is not without its drawbacks. The vibration motors take a lot of energy to run, and so such a system would drain the battery of a mobile device very quickly. That alone might sink the idea of such a system, because mobile energy is very short and usually reserved for more efficient features. Second, while the system protects against basic acoustic noise interception, one could simply record the object with a high-speed camera or attach an accelerometer to the table it sits on and record the message being sent. Although you can get around that by introducing a psuedorandom frequency to vibrate at and send information to correlate with the other device, much like normal cell phones today. Finally, this paper does not give an optimal bit encoding that saves the most information, and such a system would likely not work without rigorous further testing.
