---
layout: post
title: Does 7 years of experience help solve high school math team problems?
description: Yes, yes it does.
tags: math
---

While doing some spring cleaning, I found an old ICTM regional contest from 2010. Naturally, I wondered if 4 years of engineering school + 3 years of software engineering work
had made me any better at math. I actually do remember these being a lot harder though...

The contest itself was for Junior-Senior 8-person, so I was basically trying to be 8 people at once.

Anyways, here's the questions and my solutions to them. I don't have a good way of checking them, so if someone finds something wrong with them, please tell me!

1. One of the six letters of ILLINI is selected at random. Find the probability that the letter selected is one of the letters of the state name INDIANA. Express your answer as a
common fraction reduced to lowest terms.

    The common letters between the two words are I and N. Since we have 4 out of the 6 possible letters in ILLINI showing up, our answer is
    $$\frac{4}{6} = \frac{2}{3}$$

2. It is known that x varies directly as y. If $$x = 4$$ when $$y = 8$$, find the value of $$x$$ when $$y = 20$$.

    $$8 = 4k \Rightarrow k = 2$$

    $$20 = 2x \Rightarrow x = 10$$

3. For all values of $$x$$ for which the trig functions in this problem are defined, $$(1 + \tan^2 x)(1 + \cot^2 x) =$$

    $$(1 + \tan^2 x)(1 + \cot^2 x) = (1 + \frac{\sin^2 x}{\cos^2 x})(1 + \frac{\cos^2 x}{\sin^2 x}) \\ = (\frac{\cos^2 x + \sin^2 x}{\cos^2 x})(\frac{\sin^2 x + \cos^2 x}{\sin^2 x})
    = \frac{1}{\cos^2 x \sin^2x} = \sec^2 x \csc^2 x$$

4. Given the following recursive definition for a sequence: $$t_1 = 29$$ and for all positive integers $$n$$ such that $$n \geq 2$$, $$t_n = t_{(n-1)} -3$$. Find the sum of the first 30 terms of this sequence.

    $$t(n) = 29 - \sum_{i=1}^{n-1} 3$$. 

    So we have to find the sum of all of this sequence between $$t(1) = 29$$ and $$t(30) = 29 - \sum_{i=1}^{29} 3 = 29 - 3*29 = -58$$.

    To do that, we can use the formula $$(a - b + 1)(a+b)/2$$ and divide by 3 to get the full sum. Since we're already including the endpoints, we can disregard the 1. As a result, we find:

    $$\frac{(29 - (-58))(29 - 58)}{2 * 3} = \frac{87 * -29}{6} = -435$$

5. Let $$P(A)$$ represent the probability of $$A$$ and $$P(B)$$ represent the probability of $$B$$. If $$P(A) = 0.2$$ and $$P(B) = 0.3$$, find $$P(A \cup B)$$ if $$A$$ and $$B$$ are independent events.
   Express your answer as a **decimal**.

    $$P(A \cup B) = P(A) + P(B) - P(A \cap B) = 0.2 + 0.3 - 0.06 = 0.44$$

6. The infinite geometric series $$1 + 7x + 49x^2 + \dots$$ is a convergent geometric series for all values of $$x$$ such that $$k < x < w$$. Find the value of $$(w - k)$$.

    $$\sum_{k = 0}^n (7x)^k$$

    Therefore this series is convergent when $$\frac{1}{1 - 7x} < 1$$  which is between $$0 < x < \frac{1}{7}$$. Therefore $$(w - k) = \frac{1}{7}$$

7. If $$C \subseteq D$$ and $$E \subset D$$, which one of the following statements is true? (Note: In set notation, $$X'$$ is one representation for the complement of $$X$$.)

    a) $$C' \cup E' = (C \cup E)'$$

    b) $$C' \cup E' = (C' \cap E)'$$

    c) $$C = E$$

    d) $$C' \cap E' = (C \cup E)'$$

    e) $$C' \cap E' = (C \cap E)'$$

    Answer is D. I like to make an analogy to DeMorgan's law - NOT (A OR B) = NOT A AND NOT B.


8. The lengths of a **scalene acute** triangle are all integers. Find the smallest perimeter of any such triangle if the sine of one of the angles of the triangles is $$\frac{4}{5}$$.

    A right scalene triangle with a minimum perimeter and a sine of $$\frac{4}{5}$$ is a 3-4-5 right triangle. So an acute scalene triangle with whole number sides would have a perimeter of
    $$6 + 4 + 5 = 15$$.

9. Find the value of $$x$$ such that $$\log_6 x = 3.5$$.

    $$6^{\log_6 x} = 6^{3.5} \Rightarrow x = 6^3 * 6^{0.5} = 216\sqrt{6}$$

10. If $$n$$ is a positive integer, find the value of $$n$$ such that

    $$\frac{1 + 2 + 3 + \cdots + n}{1(2) + 2(3) + 3(4) + \cdots + n(n+1)} = \frac{1}{18}$$
    
    $$\frac{1 + 2 + 3 + \cdots + n}{1(2) + 2(3) + 3(4) + \cdots + n(n+1)} = \frac{\sum_{i=1}^k n}{\sum_{i=1}^k n^2 + \sum_{i=1}^k n} \\

      \frac{\frac{n(n+1)}{2}}{\frac{n(n+1)(2n + 1)}{6} + \frac{n(n+1)}{2}} = \frac{n(n+1)}{n(n+1)}\frac{1}{2}\frac{6}{2n + 4} = \frac{3}{2n + 4} = \frac{1}{18} \\

        2n + 4 = 54 \Rightarrow n = 25$$

11. Let vector $$\vec{c} = (1, -4, k)$$ and $$\vec{d} = (4, 0, 1)$$. If $$\vec{c} \bullet \vec{d}$$ is 21, what is $$k$$?

    $$1 * 4 + -4 * 0 + k * 1 = 21 \Rightarrow k = 17$$

12. The three non-zero roots of $$x^3 + (r-p)x^2 - qx + 3pq = 0$$ are $$p, q, r$$. Find the value of $$r - p$$.

    $$(x - p)(x - q)(x - r) = x^3 - (r + p + q)x^2 + (rp + rq + pq)x - rpq \Rightarrow\\

    rpq = 3pq \Rightarrow r = 3 \\

    -(p + q + 3) = (3 - p) \Rightarrow -p - q -3  = 3 - p \Rightarrow q = -6 \\

    3p + -18 + -6p = 6 \Rightarrow p = -8 \\ 

    r - p = 3 - (-8) = 11$$

13. The weights of fifteen students in a sixth-grade class were recorded as \{62, 65, 69, 74, 75, 79, 80,  85, 86, 90, 92, 99, 104, 107, 113\}. The mean weight and median weight were calculated. Then a recording error was discovered: the 69 should have been 96. The mean and median were then recalculated. If $$x = (new mean) -(original mean)$$ and $$(new median) - (original median)$$, find $$\vert x - y\vert$$.

    Let the mean of the original sequence be $$S_1 = \frac{1}{15} \sum_{i=i}^{15} W_n$$ The new mean is expressed as $$\frac{1}{15} \sum_{i=1}^{15} W_n - 69 + 96$$. Therefore the mean difference is $$\frac{96 - 69}{15}$$ = $$\frac{9}{5}$$. The median difference is 1, so $$\vert x - y \vert$$ = $$\frac{4}{5}$$. 

14. From the set of the 120 positive integers {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, $$\cdots$$, 120}, an integer is selected at random. Find the probability that the left-most digit is 1. Express your answer as a common fraction reduced to lowest terms.

    All digits with 1 in the leftmost digit being 1 is 1, 10-19, and 100-120, which gives 32 numbers. $$\frac{32}{120} = \frac{4}{15}$$.

15. All ages in this problem are in whole numbers of years. A father has 3 sons whose present ages are in an arithmetic progression and sum to the father's age now. Five years ago, the sum of the sons' ages then was half the father's present age, and the eldest son then was 4 times as old as the youngest son was then. Find the age of the oldest son at present.

    Let $$(a,b,c)$$ represent the ages of the sons, and $$x$$ the age of the father. So,

    $$a + b + c = x$$

    $$(a - 5) + (b - 5) + (c - 5) = \frac{x}{2}$$

    $$(c - 5) = 4(a - 5)$$

    Since the sons' age is in an arithmetic sequence, we can write everything in terms of $$a$$:

    $$a + (a + k) + (a + 2k) = x \Rightarrow 3a + 3k = x$$

    $$(a - 5) + (a + k - 5) + (a + 2k -5) = \frac{x}{2} \Rightarrow 3(a-5) + 3k = \frac{x}{2}$$

    $$(a - 5) + 2k = 4(a-5) \Rightarrow k = \frac{3}{2}(a - 5)$$

    $$3(a-5) + 3k = 3(a-5) + 3(\frac{3}{2}(a-5)) = \frac{x}{2} \Rightarrow 6(a-5) + 9(a-5) = 15(a-5) = x$$

    $$3a + 3(\frac{3}{2}(a-5)) = 15(a-5) \Rightarrow 6a +9(a-5) = 30(a-5) \Rightarrow 6a = 21(a-5) \Rightarrow \\

      6a = 21a -105  \Rightarrow a = 7$$

    $$c = a + 2(\frac{3}{2}(a-5)) = 7 + 6 = 13$$

16. Let $$i = \sqrt{-1}$$. If $$\cos(-\frac{\pi}{6}) + i \sin(-\frac{\pi}{6})$$ is expressed in the form $$x + yi$$ where $$x$$ and $$y$$ are real numbers, then $$(x+y)$$ can be expressed in the form $$\frac{\sqrt{k} + w}{p}$$ where $$k$$, $$w$$, and $$p$$ are integers. Find the smallest possible value of $$(k + w + p)$$.

    $$\cos(-\frac{\pi}{6}) = -\frac{\sqrt{3}}{2}, \sin(-\frac{\pi}{6}) = -\frac{1}{2}$$, so $$(k + w + p) = 3 + 1 + 2 = 6$$

17. The lengths of all sides of a triangle are integers, and two of these lengths are 7 and 10. From such possible triangles, two non-congruent triangles are selected without replacement at random. Find the probability that both triangles selected were acute triangles. Express your answer as a common fraction reduced to lowest terms.

    The possibilites for the third side are all whole numbers between 4 and 16. To figure this out, we can figure out what possibilites for the third side will give us right triangles. The numbers between those two values will be acute triangles.

    $$a < x < c$$

    $$7^2 + 10^2 = c^2 \Rightarrow c = \sqrt{149}$$

    $$a^2 + 7^2 = 10^2 \Rightarrow a = \sqrt{51}$$

    The only possibilites are 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12. So the probability of picking two acute triangles without replacement is $$\frac{5}{13}\frac{4}{12} = \frac{5}{39}$$.

18. Let $$i = \sqrt{-1}$$. Find the value of $$\vert (6+8i)^3 \vert$$.

    This can also be rewritten as $$\vert (6+8i) \vert^3$$ = $$10^3$$ = $$1000$$.

19. A parabola has its line of symmetry parallel tot the y-axis and has its vertex at (3,4). The point (9,8) lies on the parabola. Find the **y-coordinate only** of the focus of this parabola. express your answer as a **decimal**.

    The vertex form of a quadratic is $$y = a(x - h)^2 + k$$, where $$(h, k)$$ is the vertex.

    Plugging our numbers in and solving for $$a$$m $$8 = a(9 - 3)^2 + 4 \Rightarrow a = \frac{1}{9}$$.

    To calculate the y-coordinate of the focus, we use the equation $$y = k + \frac{1}{4a} \Rightarrow 4 + \frac{1}{\frac{4}{9}} = 4 + \frac{9}{4} = 6.25$$

20. Let $$S = \{a_1, a_2, a_3, \dots, a_n\}$$. In general, the harmonic mean of $$S$$ is $$\frac{n}{\sum_{i=1}^n \frac{1}{a_i}}$$. Let $$T = \{1, \frac{1}{3}, \frac{1}{6}, \frac{1}{10}, \dots, \frac{1}{0.5n(n+1)}\}$$. If the harmonic mean of $$T$$ is $$\frac{1}{100}$$, find the value of $$n$$.

    $$\frac{n}{\sum_{i =1}^{n} \frac{1}{T_i}} = \frac{n}{\sum_{i=1}^n 0.5n(n+1)} = \frac{n}{0.5\sum_{i=1}^n n^2 + n} = \frac{2n}{\frac{n(n+1)(2n+1)}{6} + \frac{n(n+1)}{2}} \\

      = \frac{2n}{n(n+1)(\frac{2n + 1}{6} + \frac{1}{2})} = \frac{2}{\frac{(n+1)(2n + 1 + 3)}{6}} = \frac{12}{2(n+1)(n+2)} = \frac{6}{(n+1)(n+2)} \Rightarrow \\

      \frac{1}{100} = \frac{6}{(n+1)(n+2)} \Rightarrow (n+1)(n+2) = 600 \Rightarrow n^2 + 3n + 2 - 600 = 0$$

      From here, it's tough to do a quadratic formula. But going back to $$(n+1)(n+2) = 600$$, we notice that $$24 * 25 = 600$$, so $$n = 23$$ as a guess. Dividing -598 by 23 gives -26, so we know it's the correct answer.

