---
layout: post
title: Surah Al-Mulk Ayah 4
description: Surah Al-Mulk Translation & Analysis
tags: ['al-mulk']
hidden: true
---

ثُمَّ ٱرْجِعِ ٱلْبَصَرَ كَرَّتَيْنِ يَنقَلِبْ إِلَيْكَ ٱلْبَصَرُ خَاسِئًۭا وَهُوَ حَسِيرٌۭ

Then look again and again—your sight will return frustrated and weary.

# Arabic Breakdown

ثُمَّ usually translates to "then", and is a connector word between sentences. (There's a more technical name for that, but I don't know it.)
Like the previous ayah, we have the form IV verb ارجع, which means "to make return". Again we have بصر, or sight as the direct object. When combined,
the literal translation is "to make return sight" - but it can also be translated or interpreted as "look".

كرُّتين is an interesting word. The root letters are كر, which means "to return to". This is the form II verbal noun form, which means "repeating". When combined
with the above phrase, we can interpret it as "Look again" or "Look twice". It's also in the plural form in the accusative case, which would imply that it's describing
sight, giving credence to the idea of it meaning "Look again".

I'm not entirely sure what tense ينقلبْ is in. I think it might be in a jussive tense, considering we translate it as "will return". قلب, it's root, translates "to turn around".
This is the form VII of the verb, which means "to be turned around". This is still a verbal sentence, with the doer being بصر. We also have اليك, which is a prepositional phrase
meaning "to you". The Arabic doesn't make sense when in its original order, but rearraging it, we see that it means "sight will return to you".

خاسِءً is another interesting word. It is translated as "to be driven away". This is the doer form of that verb, meaning "the one who is driven away" or "the defeated one".
I also don't know the purpose of وهو here. و normally means "and", and هو is a detached pronoun meaning "He". I guess it could make sense, as the next word also describes your sight.
حسير means "tired", and it is a nount of intensity, so it could mean "very tired". While the sentence in English doesn't make too much sense - "Sight will return to you defeated and it is tired." -
we can also rewrite it as "Sight will return to you defeated and tired."

# Commentary

This verse mainly is related to the previous one, where Allah (swt) shows the perfection of his creation. He challenges us to look at it again and again for any faults - and our sight
will return to us "frustrated" and "weary". Some other adjectives used to describe this include "humbled" and "humiliated", which really underscores the perfection of Allah (swt) and his
work. StudyQuran also mentions that this verse is related to 4:82, which says that one who contemplates the Quran will find no discrepancy in it.

# References

1. StudyQuran
2. [Quran.com](www.quran.com/67/4)
3. [QuranHive.com](https://quranhive.com/surah/67/)
