---
layout: post
title: Surah Al-Mulk Ayah 10
description: Translation & Commentary
tags: ['al-mulk']
hidden: true
---

وَقَالُوا۟ لَوْ كُنَّا نَسْمَعُ أَوْ نَعْقِلُ مَا كُنَّا فِىٓ أَصْحَـٰبِ ٱلسَّعِيرِ

"And they will lament, 'If only we had listened and reasoned, we would not be among the residents of the Blaze!'"

# Arabic Breakdown

Like before قالو means "they will say". لو is a conditional phrase, meaning "if". It has some effect on the sentence, but I'm not entirely sure what that effect is. I'm
presuming that it makes both parts of the if-then conditional the same case. In this case, however, they're both verbal sentences, so it doesn't really do anything.

كنّا is interesting. Essentially, it takes the following present tense verb and makes it past tense - in this case, the world is يسمع, meaning "we are listening". The كناأ{
in the beginning turns this into "we had listened". Similarly, because of the rule of أو, this also applies to نعقل, turning "we are reasoning" to "we had reasoned".

We have a similar reasoning in the next part of the ayat, only that ما is a negation. This is actually a verbal sentence, with كنا being the verb. Our direct object is hidden,
but it's في اصحاب السعير.


 في normally means "in", but it can also mean "among". We have a possessive construct as the second part of the sentence, with اصحاب meaning
"peoples". You might recognize the root as being the same as صحب- it's the plural form. Finally, سعير translates to Blaze. All in all, we can translate this to be "We would not be
among the people of the Blaze!"

# Commentary / Reflection

There's an interesting reflection about listening here. We always think that we should have done this ore that - but (at least I) don't think about listening and reasoning as much
as I should. Listening is something we can do, but it's what we reason with our information that leads to us changing for the sake of Allah (swt). Here, the disbelievers will
regret their lack of listening and reasoning. It's important that we do both, and we take the time to understand how it can affect us. I don't listen well - a lot of times things will
come in one ear and come out the other. I'm missing that reasoning focus - inshaAllah I can develop it.

# References

1. [Quran.com](quran.com/67/10)
2. [Quranreflect.com](https://quranreflect.com/posts/5259)
3. StudyQuran
