---
layout: post
title: Paper Review&#58; Energy Consumption in Mobile Phones&#58; A Measurement Study and Implications for Network Applications
---
Some background: this is an older paper review where instead of trying to explain the paper in detail, I would summarize it, list some assumptions, and then list the pros and cons. The original paper can be found [here](https://people.cs.umass.edu/~arun/papers/TailEnder.pdf).

In this paper, Venkataramani et al. develop both a model of the energy used by different cellular communication protocols such as 3G, GSM, and Wi-Fi. They also develop a protocol called TailEnder which minimizes the energy used by a system while doing common tasks such as sending emails. The authors compared the energy used by all three communication protocols while taking into account different factors such as the device, location, and more. What they found is that 3G has the greatest tail energy, which is the energy wasted in high-power states after the transfer is completed, according to the paper, followed by GSM and Wi-Fi. To try and reduce this energy, the authors designed an algorithm called TailEnder to minimize this energy, by delaying certain tasks defined by the user, and by prefetching data as to minimize energy consumption later.

There were a few assumptions made by the paper. One was that in their model of GSM and 3G, they formulated it in very urban, high-density areas with high-availability of cell service, unlike a rural or more suburban area where access might be spottier or otherwise worse. Another assumption is that the devices for measuring GSM and 3G/Wi-Fi are different, and so have different power requirements and specifications that were not really accounted for - the GSM phone was measured using a specific Nokia program versus a general hardware power meter, which would be more accurate in this case. Finally, we assume that no other applications are running while evaluating the TailEnder protocol, as to measure the real-time background impact. Measuring with respect to use of the phone would be a better idea.

Three pros of the paper were the overall model of the energy consumption by different protocols, which give a very accurate model of the energy used by 3G, GSM, and Wi-Fi. These energy readings allow us to look for places where we can potentially save energy, leading to TailEnder. TailEnder directly minimizes the tail energy wasted by the mobile device by introducing a delay for specific tasks, allowing a single transmission of a large packet at once, saving energy over time. Finally, TailEnder also prefetches data so that it can save energy, instead of attempting to pull data every so often and consuming energy in the process. All these allow for faster loading and decreased energy usage on the mobile device.

However, there are multiple cons to this algorithm and model. FIrst of all, the model does not take into account density of Wi-Fi access points or density of 3G/GSM usage (although it does try to approximate it with trying to receive/send data at night). A better way would have been to try and increase the number of users in the same area and then measure consumption. Second, TailEnder will only work for applications where a certain amount of delay is acceptable, such as email or news feeds. It would not be suitable for instant messaging or VoIP. Finally, when TailEnder prefetches data, it also prefetches meaningless and unimportant data just in case, which could be reduced and allow for more energy savings.
