---
layout: post
title: Paper Review&#58; MACAW&#58; A Media Access Protocol for Wireless LANs
---

Some background: this is an older paper review where instead of trying to explain the paper in detail, I would summarize it, list some assumptions, and then list the pros and cons. The original paper can be found [here](https://pdos.csail.mit.edu/archive/decouto/papers/bharghavan94.pdf).

In this paper, Bharghavan et. al describe an improvement to the MACA protocol which addresses a few of the implementation notes of MACA and make it suitable for a wireless LAN in their research center. The MACA algorithm uses a basic Ready-To-Send (RTS) and Clear-To-Send (CTS) algorithm, and MACAW improves on this algorithm by revising the RTS-CTS method, implementing a new backoff algorithm for collision avoidance, and using a multiple-stream allocation for bandwidth that is more fair to each of the receivers. This algorithm, from the results, has indicated to be quite fair in terms of splitting bandwidth between multiple receivers, changing it from an unequal allocation (½ for receiving at the base station and ¼ for sending from) to ⅓ of the bandwidth for each operation. In addition, this paper implemented an ACK packet in order for more reliable data transmissions, which is a standard that has been upheld today. In addition, the backoff algorithm reduces collisions significantly and allows a higher packets per second rate.

Some assumptions this paper makes is that the sender station is in range of only one receiver station. If the sender is on the edge of two receiver stations, the algorithm could essentially make the sender hold up both stations while it transmits. This would reduce the amount of packets one could send to the network as a whole. In addition, the mobile devices they were using were small “pads” built solely for this purpose. It’s not hard to see that bigger devices, with multiple signals coming in and out of the device, could realistically interfere, decreasing the cellular bandwidth. Especially with today’s phones, perhaps this algorithm is not the best for implementation, as there are many devices working and sending signals. Finally, this approach was only tested within a single room, and far-field communications would most likely fail with this method, as the amount of interference from other stations would render this algorithm unworkable in larger spaces.

There were several strengths of the paper, which included the multiple-stream idea. This involves splitting the bandwidth between each task, whether is be sending and receiving data. Previously, it was split into half sending and receiving, so this was more fair to the receiver. Another strength is the idea of having each sender/receiver send ACK messages to acknowledge the packet, which is now commonly used today. A third strength is the backoff algorithm, which greatly reduces the number of collisions.

Nevertheless, this paper was not without its weaknesses. The pads are low-frequency low-power signals, which means that such a system is probably not very implementable today. Second, stations are not synchronized unless a single sender connects to both; this means that if one sender is hogging the stream between it and a receiver, other senders must wait to transmit information. Finally, the backoff algorithm is complex and performance-hungry, making it suboptimal for lower-cost systems.
