---
layout: post
title: Acoustic-Driven Car Seat Localization
---
### Members: Mohammad Saad and Saad Paya

In this project, we developed an algorithm (and corresponding Android application) for localizing where you are inside a car.

We decided to take this project due to the prevalence of texting and driving, which has been on the rise in the past few years. So what if you could disable your phone when you're in the drivers seat? How could you disable it when you're in the driver's seat, but not anywhere else?

One way to approach it is to use acoustics. When we say acoustic, we really just mean sound waves. The idea is that sound will bounce off different objects in the vicinity of the driver, and not so much in the passenger seats.

The concept behind this (we think) is the idea of "room modes". These are very low resonant frequencies (around 20-200 Hz), which are only seen when the room is excited by a sound wave. We can excite and measure these room modes by doing a frequency sweep. Our frequency sweep was between 1 kHz and 8 kHz at max volume.

To figure out whether we were in the drivers' seat, we took a look at the frequencies measured from the microphone. We figured we'd have pretty high magnitudes at the emitted frequencies (shifted a tiny bit) but we also found that the resonany frequencies gave us a pretty good classification of the seats. The driver's seat had the lowest room mode magnitude (or any magnitude in that vicinity, around 80 Hz for my car). So it was pretty easy to design a classifier for this, as we just needed to threshold the value around that frequency. We actually achieved a fairly high classification rate, around 90%, which was honestly pretty shocking.

A few assumptions we made was the position of the phone while we were classifying. We did eventually figure out that the orientation (and location itself) didn't matter as much as we thought it would, but it can be a problem in other cars. Speaking of other cars, we only tested in my car, and so our results may not be calibrated for every vehicle out there. I think a few samples should be enough to determine where the room modes are, but it will take more experimentation to find these out.
