---
layout: post
title: Paper Review&#58; A Rate-Adaptive MAC Protocol for Multi-Hop Wireless Networks
---

Some background: this is an older paper review where instead of trying to explain the paper in detail, I would summarize it, list some assumptions, and then list the pros and cons. The original paper can be found [here](http://web.cs.ucla.edu/classes/fall03/cs218/paper/p236-holland.pdf).

In this paper, Holland et al. propose a new Medium Access Control protocol that dynamically selects a transmission rate for data based on the quality of the channel. The main difference between this protocol and other ones is that the receiver, instead of the sender, determines the channel quality and data rate of the transmission. This allows more power savings, as the receiver does not have to send detailed channel information to the sender so that it can make the decision, as well as setting the best information, as the channel quality is best measured at the receiver. The paper also notes that the modifications to the 802.11 protocol are minimal and easy to implement, so it can be widespread fairly quickly. Performance wise, their algorithm (called RBAR) outperforms most of the other MAC algorithms in terms of throughput such as Quadrature Amplitude Modulation and Quantitative Phase-Shift Keying.

One assumption the paper makes is that the RTS/CTS protocol is used for every data transmission. While most data transactions with 802.11 do use RTS/CTS, there are several (such as basic access 802.11) which do not use it. Another assumption is that the receiver or sender will move fairly consistently, which allows for less predictive measures to be implemented, and instead the basic RBAR algorithm is less effective than others. Third, there was no mention of interference anywhere in the paper, so I think this was an assumption the authors took while implementing this algorithm.

The paper’s RBAR algorithm is a significant improvement in terms of throughput and distance, as the distance drop off at extremely long ranges (250-300m) drops off a bit farther away than all the other algorithms. This means we have a protocol that can transfer information at longer distances, which is always useful. Second, the implementation of the protocol is very simple, changing the frame headers of 802.11 and introducing a single component, making it easily accessible. Finally, pushing the channel quality and rate selection to the receiver allows less overhead on the sender, allowing for more power savings on the sender itself.

One con of the paper is that for wireless communications with receivers and senders very close to each other, the performance is not as great as other algorithms, while it excels in farther ranges away. So as one moves towards the receiver/sender, the throughput does not adapt as well as other algorithms. One other con of the paper is that the estimation of the channel quality is done based on a single sample, which is prone to error and is replaced by several better methods. Finally, the RBAR algorithm’s overhead is significantly larger than other algorithms, making performance an issue in the long run.
