---
layout: post
title: Surah Al-Mulk Ayah 8
description: Commentary & Translation of Surah Al-Mulk
tags: ['al-mulk']
---

تَكَادُ تَمَيَّزُ مِنَ ٱلْغَيْظِ ۖ كُلَّمَآ أُلْقِىَ فِيهَا فَوْجٌۭ سَأَلَهُمْ خَزَنَتُهَآ أَلَمْ يَأْتِكُمْ نَذِيرٌۭ

"almost bursting in fury. Every time a group is cast into it, its keepers will ask them, “Did a warner not come to you?”

# Arabic Breakdown

تكاد means "almost", or he "almost". There's actually a lot of definitions for this, to be on the point, it wouldn't have taken much more. I'm not entirely sure why it's conjugated in second/feminine present though - the only
version of the verb is a form I verb. تَمَيَّزُ translates "burst", but in Hans Wehr the form II verb is translated as to distinguish, or to separate. I think you can make an argument bursts can mean separating or distinguishing.
مِنَ ٱلْغَيْظِ ۖ translates "with anger". The root of the word is غيظ, which means "to anger" or "to irritate

كل means every or all. In this case, it means "every time". ألقي is a form IV verb meaning "to throw". It's in the plural past tense I think, meaning "they were thrown".  فيها translates to "in it", referring to the Hellfire.
فوج means group. (I think this is funny, but it also can mean "band"). سأل means "to ask", with an attached pronoun meaning "them". خزنتها means "its keepers". The root of the word is خزن, which means "to keep". I'm not sure how
this became "keepers", since it's not a typical doer - so I'll have to figure that out.

The last sentence starts with الم, which is a jussive particle meaning "did not". The jussive particle affects the verb أتي, which means to come, and it has
the effect of negating the verb. The verb itself is in the present tense third person, and has an attached pronoun for "you all". The doer of the verbal sentence
is نذير, which means "warner". In total, the sentence translates "Did we not send to you all a warner?"

# Commentary

The main "keeper" is Malik, as seen in 43:77-78. There are 19 keepers, as seen in 74:30-31. I think this is interesting, personally - (my opinion) but Allah (swt)
has definitely sent warners to me, in the case of the Prophet (SAW) and the Quran, and so if I end up in Jahannam, what's my excuse? I think sometimes we
excuse or rationalize our own sins and forgive ourselves, and then absolutely destroy others when we see it in others. What I see is to hold myself to the
highest standards, and to help others and forgive them for mistakes they make (the concept of Dhul-Al-Hasan).

# References

1. [Quran.com](quran.com/67/8)
2. [Quranhive.com](quranhive.com/67)
3. StudyQuran
