---
layout: post
title: Surah Al-Mulk Ayah 7
description: Translation & Analysis of Surah Al-Mulk
tags: ['al-mulk']
hidden: true
---

إِذَآ أُلْقُوا۟ فِيهَا سَمِعُوا۟ لَهَا شَهِيقًۭا وَهِىَ تَفُورُ

When they are tossed into it, they will hear its roaring as it boils over,

# Arabic Breakdown

إذا means "when", and generally is pretty commonly used. القوا is an interesting word. The root of it is لقي, which means "to encounter" or "to meet". This is the form IV
verb, which means "to throw". It's conjugated in the plural third person past tense, indicating that the disbelievers from the last ayah are all being thrown. Finally,
فيها means "into it", where it is referring to Jahannam from the previous ayah.

The next verbal sentence starts with سمعوا, which means "to hear". I thought it was conjugated in the past tense, but that would be سَمَعُوا. So I think this is actually a
future tense, i.e. "they will hear". Similar to above, we see لها as a connector, meaning "from it". شهيق means "inhaling" or "braying" or "braying of a donkey". Think
of this very ugly sound - that's what I associate with this word. It should be noted that I think this is the direct object of the verb سمغوا, i.e. "they will hear from it
the braying/inhaling".

The last sentence is a short verbal sentence. تفور translates "boiling up". What's interesting is that this is conjugated in either second person present or third person
feminine present. I think this is just the way we express the fire.

# Commentary

This verse refers to the sound that people when the disbelievers are dragged into the Hellfire. It's interesting that the word is used for braying like
a donkey, which is this super ugly sound. Like the braying of a donkey is this super aggressive sound, one you definitely don't want to hear
even once. So when the disbelievers are
being dragged, we should be afraid of it for ourselves, lest we become one of them.

# References

1. [Quran.com](quran.com/67/7)
2. [Quranhive.com](quranhive.com/67)
3. StudyQuran
